1. “The architectures of OLAP data warehouses differ significantly from those of database systems supporting OLTP”

(a) Briefly describe the requirements for a data warehouse architecture.

Separation
The architecture should keep OLAP and OLTP applications apart as much as possible
    
Scalability
The architecture should enable easy upgrade of hardware and software as data volumes and users’ requirements increase

Extensibility
The architecture should allow new applications and technologies to be incorporated incrementally

Security
Access to the data must be monitored and controlled as a valuable resource

Administration
Systems and tools must be provided which support the management of the data warehouse

(b) Many data warehouses follow a two-layer architecture.
    Explain what is separated in a two-level architecture and the advantages of this separation.

Two-layer architecture separates operational and external data from data warehouse data.

Advantages of this separation include the following points of independence from the OLTP and external data.

1. Availability; The data warehouse remains accessible independently of external data source availability
2. Performance; The workload of the data warehouse doesn't impact nor is it impacted by the OLTP
3. Logical design; The logical design decisions for the data warehouse do not impact the OLTP
4. Data granularity; The level of detailed used for data warehouse e.g. time granularity is independent of the OLTP
5. Physical model and optimization techniques; The physical model and any associated optimization techniques will be independent of the OLTP

(c) A three-layer architecture for data warehouses is also commonly found.
    Explain how this differs from a two-level architecture.

In this architecture, a reconciled data store (layer) sits between the operational/external data layer and the data warehouse.

The ETL operations that would import data to the data warehouse will target this reconciled data store instead.

This layer acts as a reference data model which may itself be a data warehouse supporting queries. Typically it will be highly normalized and represent a common reference model for an enterprise. 

The reconciled data store acts as a data source for a non-normalized data warehouse which has been designed for efficient support of OLAP and data mining queries. 

(d) Data marts are often used in both two and three layer architectures.
    Explain what a data mart is, the two main approaches to building a data mart and the advantages of each.

A data mart is a subset of a data warehouse, designed for use by one part of an organization.

The first approach is to build independent data marts, which reduce the initial setup time and enable incremental integration of the data mart in the data warehouse.

The second approach is to use a bus architecture, perform up-front analysis to ensure the meaning of dimensions and attributes are the same across all other data marts (and data warehouse). Although a slower approach, the organization does benefit from a well-analysed enterprise wide data model.
